The San Antonio Express-News is a daily newspaper of San Antonio, Texas. It is ranked as the fourth-largest daily newspaper in the state of Texas in terms of circulation (third-largest for Sunday circulation), and is one of the leading news sources of South Texas, with offices in Austin, Brownsville, Laredo, and Mexico City. The Express-News is owned by the Hearst Corporation.The paper was first published in 1865 as a weekly tabloid-style newspaper under the name San Antonio Express. At that time, the city had already had a number of other newspapers in a number of different languages. However, all the other publications went out of business, leaving only the Express to serve the city.In December 1866, the Express made the move from a weekly paper to a daily newspaper, and expanded into a full newspaper by the early 1870s. The early days of the Express was marked by several leadership changes which almost doomed the paper, until a brand new company, the Express Printing Company, took control in 1875. The Express eventually became a daily morning newspaper in 1878.In January 1881 a new rival newspaper, the Evening Light, was first published by A. W. Gifford and J. P. Newcomb, who had been an early investor in the Express.[3] The Evening Light was published as an afternoon paper, as opposed to the morning Express. At first, the editors of the Express chose to ignore the upstart paper, but the Light soon grew in popularity at the turn of the 20th century. In 1906 the Daily Light was sold to E. B. Chandler, and in 1909 the Daily Light Publishing Company bought the San Antonio Gazette. From then until 1911 the paper was referred to as the Light and Gazette. Edward S. O'Reilly, known as Tex, was at one time managing editor. In 1911 Harrison L. Beach and Charles S. Diehl, veteran correspondents of national standing, moved to San Antonio and bought the Light and Gazette. Once again it was known as the Light. Diehl was a founder of the AP wire service. Beach and Diehl installed leased wire news service and published the first full stock market reports in a San Antonio paper. The Light became liberal-Democratic in its political views. While Beach and Diehl ran the paper, circulation increased from 11,000 to 25,000 copies daily. In 1918, the Express ownership, now renamed Express Publishing Company, launched its own afternoon paper, the San Antonio Evening News. Soon thereafter, a rivalry developed between workers of the Express and the News. In fact, some News workers dubbed a new office building as the News-Express building. In 1924, however, William Randolph Hearst bought the Light and instituted Hearst policies, and by 1945 the circulation was approximately 70,000.The 1920s was marked by expansion by Express Publishing as the company started one of the city's first radio stations, WOAI, in 1922. Meanwhile, the company's future owners, in the form of William Randolph Hearst, purchased the Light. As the two rival companies entered the 1950s, the Express and the News both had higher readership numbers than the Light. However, the Light skyrocketed to the top of the market when it acquired a number of popular comic strips, like Dick Tracy. Over at Express Publishing, the company diversified further as they acquired a couple more radio stations, and a television station which they renamed KENS-TV. Those call letters were intended to stand for, K-Express News Station. In the 1960s, Express Publishing was sold to the Harte-Hanks newspaper group.In 1973, with the Light beating the Express and the News in circulation numbers, a new ownership group emerged. Australian native Rupert Murdoch of News Corp bought the Express and the News from Harte-Hanks. Murdoch re-formatted the News as a more tabloid-styled paper, while the Express retained its original, conservative format. The Light was now forced to compete against two different styles of newspaper while at the same time trying to combat the growing costs of an afternoon circulation.By September 1984, the Express and the News merged into the Express-News and afternoon service was slowly discontinued, while the Light started getting into the morning circulation business in order to keep up. But under News Corp., the Express-News adopted a more mainstream format and expanded its services to communities outside Bexar County. As a result, the Express-News became San Antonio's leading newspaper for good. By 1992, News Corp had diversified into movies and television and was looking to sell the Express-News. The Hearst Corporation, which still owned the Light, agreed to either sell or close the newspaper and acquire the Express-News in order to keep its stake in the San Antonio market. The Light never found a buyer and it went out of business in January 1993.On February 13, 2016, the paper broke the news of the death of US Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia.[4]Today, this Hearst Corp. newspaper is led by Publisher Susan Lynch Pape, who is also Hearst's Texas Group chief financial officer at the "Houston Chronicle" and the "San Antonio Express-News." Mike Leary is Senior Vice President and Editor of the "San Antonio Express-News." Jamie Stockwell is the managing editor.In 2016, ExpressNews.com, the paper's subscriber website, was awarded an EPPY Award from Editor & Publisher for its digital storytelling and a narrative story about a man and his family's battle with ALS. Also that year, the site earned top prize in its division for best newspaper website in the National Headliner Awards.In 2004, The Express-News earned its first-ever "Newspaper of the Year" honors from the Texas Associated Press Managing Editors. The Express-News was honored as the best daily paper in its big-city circulation category, topping competitors in Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, and Austin.The Express-News is a critic of the border wall pushed by U.S. President Donald Trump. The publication claims that the proposed barrier is based on misconceptions, one being that illegal aliens enter the United States by escaping detection or with the use of bogus documentation. Of the approximately 11 million estimated to lack legal credentials, The Express-News reported that 40 percent have overstayed visas and did not sneak through the border. The Express-News also notes that a considerable number of illegal aliens are not Mexicans. And the newspaper said that a border wall would keep more illegals from leaving the United States than prevent others from entering. The paper predicted that Trump administration policies will "never keep out the 40 percent of the 11 million unauthorized immigrants who enter legally but subsequently overstay (or otherwise violate) the terms of their visas."[5]Opposed to crackdowns on illegal immigration, The Express-News in March 2017 quickly condemned U.S. Representative Steve King of Iowa's 4th congressional district after the Republican lawmaker used the term "somebody else's  babies" in what was considered a pejorative sense. On its editorial page, the newspaper said that "somebody else's babies" cannot be shunned aside but constitute the near majority of Texans: crop gatherers, cook and wait staff in restaurants, those repairing and replacing roofs, military personnel, and others credentialed in the professions, such as education, law, and medicine. "'Somebody else's babies' is old hat here and, demographically, this is Texas' certain future. ... We have to make it work. History says that mostly we do. American's success is grounded in its ability to assimilate a whole lot of 'somebody else's babies'. This mixing is our civilization," The Express-News concluded.[6]See also: List of museums in Central Texas