SeaWorld San Antonio is a 250-acre (100 ha) marine mammal park, oceanarium, and animal theme park, located in the Westover Hills District of the City of San Antonio in Texas. It is the largest of the three parks in the SeaWorld chain owned by SeaWorld Entertainment, and the world's largest marine-life theme park. It also has a waterpark called Aquatica on the separate end of the park. At the park, they have many shows in the summer. The other SeaWorld parks are located in San Diego, California, Orlando, Florida, and a park will soon be located in Abu Dhabi, UAE under separate ownership. It is a member of the Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums (AMMPA)[2] and is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).[3]SeaWorld San Antonio was developed by Harcourt, Brace, and Jovanovich (now Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). Built for $170 million, it opened on Memorial Day weekend in May 27, 1988 and welcomed 75,000 people during the grand opening.[4] It had 3.3 million visitors in its first 12 months of operation, placing it among the Top 10 attractions in Texas. At the time of the park's debut, it was billed as "the largest educational, marine-life theme park in the world."In 1989, Harcourt, Brace, and Jovanovich (heavy in debt and fighting a hostile takeover) sold its SeaWorld and Boardwalk and Baseball theme parks to Anheuser-Busch, Inc.[5] Plans to build a Boardwalk and Baseball park adjacent to Sea World of Texas were immediately abandoned.On November 26, 1988, Kayla (stage named "Baby Shamu") was the first killer whale born at SeaWorld San Antonio. She now resides at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida.Under Anheuser-Busch ownership, SeaWorld San Antonio closed less popular attractions such as the Texas Walk, the U.S. Map Plaza, and the Garden of Flags and added its popular Budweiser Clydesdales to the park.In 2008, Anheuser-Busch merged with InBev; soon after, the newly merged company sold the SeaWorld parks to Blackstone Group.In March 2016, SeaWorld Entertainment inc announced that the current generation of Killer Whales at it parks would be the last. SeaWorld San Antonio currently houses 5 Killer Whales, one of which is pregnant and due in April 2017. It was also announced that theatrical Killer Whale shows would be phased out and replaced with more naturalistic Orca Encounters. SeaWorld San Antonio's Orca Encounter is expected to open sometime in 2019.Formerly Shamu's Happy Harbor, the Sesame Street Bay of Play (opened in March 2011) is an interactive children's play area based on the long-running television series Sesame Street.Rides:Activities:Shows:SeaWorld's main attraction is its killer whales, which are housed in the 7-million-gallon habitats that are known in San Antonio as Shamu Theater. Shamu was the name of the first killer whale brought to SeaWorld San Diego in the 1960s. "Shamu" is now used as a stage name for adult killer whales in performances at SeaWorld parks. The killer whales all have real names.The killer whales at San Antonio are Kamea (F), Kyuquot (M), Sakari (F), Takara (F), Tuar (M) and Takara's Calf (?) {as of April 2017}A female orca, Unna, died on December 21, 2015.[6]On April 19, 2017 Takara gave birth at 2:33 CDT to her fifth calf and the last killer whale calf born to the company.There are several species of dolphins at SeaWorld San Antonio: Atlantic bottlenose dolphins, Atlantic/Pacific bottlenose hybrids, and Pacific white-sided dolphins.The 23 bottlenose dolphins are either residing in the Animal Care pools or at the new Discovery Point facility. The Animal Care pools were a part of the temporary Dolphin Walk attraction, a tour that took guests to the back area of the park to view the dolphins and other species of animals that the SeaWorld-Busch Gardens Conservation Fund cares for whilst Discovery Point was being constructed. The park's Pacific white-sided dolphins reside at Beluga Stadium and are part of shows there. Animal Care: Alice (F), Ansley (M), Brie (F), Gilly (M), Haven (F), Koko (F), Mattie (F), Nacha (F), Nala (F), Nikki (F), Notchfin (F), Punta (F), Yoyo (F), Yuri (F), and Zip (M) [as of May 25, 2017]Discovery Point: Blyss (F), Brady (M), Capri (F), Cisco (M), Fathom (M), Neelee (F), Ripley (F), and Sadie (F) [as of May 25, 2017] Bottlenose Dolphins are often transferred between Discovery Point and Animal Care. Of these 23 dolphins, 6 are males and 17 are females. Two (females Notchfin and Punta) were captured, four (males Gilly and Zip & females Mattie and Alice) were rescued, and the other 17 were born in captivity. There are 17 Atlantic bottlenose dolphins and 6 Atlantic/Pacific hybrids.The six hybrids are all females: Koko, Nacha, Nala, Neelee, Nikki, and Sadie. Koko: mother is Yoyo (Atlantic) and father is Kai (Pacific)Nacha: mother is Notchfin (Atlantic) and father is Jethro (Pacific)Nala: mother is Nikki (¼ Atlantic, ¾ Pacific) and father is Razzle (Atlantic)Neelee: mother is Nacha (½ Atlantic, ½ Pacific) and father is Hacksaw (Atlantic)Nikki: mother is Nacha (½ Atlantic, ½ Pacific) and father is Kai (Pacific)Sadie: mother is Puka (Atlantic) and father is Kai (Pacific)You may hear trainers refer to Koko, Nikki, and Sadie as “one of the Kai babies” Beluga Stadium: Pacific white-sided dolphins: Avalon (F), Betty (F), Bolt (M), Catalina (F), and Hailey (F) [as of May 25, 2017]On February 5, 2016, Dart (M) a Pacific white-sided dolphin died. His cause of death is unknown.The Beluga whales at San Antonio are Crissy (F), Imaq (M), Kenai (M), Luna (F), Martha (F), Natasha (F), Oliver (M), and Samson (M) {as of April 2017}The park's belugas regularly participate in Ocean Discovery presentations and Discovery Point Beluga Swims.On April 17, 2011, Imaq, an adult male beluga from Vancouver Aquarium, arrived to SeaWorld San Antonio on a 5-year breeding loan.[7] This is the 3rd of three beluga whales on a breeding loan from Vancouver Aquarium to SeaWorld: Nanuq, Allua, Imaq.In 2009, Nico, Maris, and Natasha from the Georgia Aquarium were moved to SeaWorld temporarily to keep them away from the worst of the noise during construction at the Georgia Aquarium.[8] Nico died on 31 October 2009. A preliminary necropsy was unable to determine if Nico's death was caused by the move or by something else.[9] On 3 March 2010, Maris and a new male, Beethoven, were returned to the Georgia Aquarium while Natasha was paired with a potential mate and remained in San Antonio.[10]On July 9, 2013, Luna gave birth to a male calf, sired by Imaq. On July 26, 2013, Crissy gave birth to a female calf, also sired by Imaq. The calf was named Stella, but on November 13, 2015, the whale died. On June 20, 2015, Martha gave birth to a female calf.[11]Martha gave birth prematurely to a female calf on June 20, 2015, it has since died.Luna gave birth on August 11, 2016 to a calf. The calf is a male and has been called Kenai.Sea Lion Stadium:Pacific Point Preserve:Pacific Point Preserve:Sea Lion Stadium:Pacific Point Preserve: Otis (M), Juliet (F)Sea Lion Stadium: Dozer (M)Dozer is currently on a breeding loan at the Point Defaince Zoo and Aquarium.Discovery Point is a tucked-away oasis within SeaWorld San Antonio. There, an expansive Dolphin Lagoon is home to a playful pod of bottlenose dolphins. Guests can watch them from its sand-swept shores, or go deeper at a Dolphin Underwater Viewing area. Guests can even reserve Discovery Point's Signature Dolphin Swim – the only place to swim with dolphins in Texas – or discover the thrill of swimming alongside Beluga Whales at Beluga Bay or Sea Lions at Sea Lion Shallows. You’ll also find Explorer’s Reef, home to several species of sharks, many of which are endangered, along with exotic fish and a living coral reef.Discovery Point officially opened to the public on May 21, 2016.Aquatica is a water park that was formerly a section of SeaWorld under the name, Lost Lagoon. Lost Lagoon opened in 1993 and closed on September 5, 2011 to be replaced by Aquatica San Antonio, a separate gated water park based on the original Aquatica Orlando that opened on March 1, 2008. Some water attractions like The Sidewinders tower (with 4 tube slides and 2 large bowl slides) were re-themed, painted and renamed Tassie's Twister. The splash attack play structure stayed but it was renovated with new theming, new slides, new interactive elements, new landscaping, and a new zero-entry pool that is named Walkabout Waters. The activity pool stayed but was also renovated with new theming, new interactive elements, new pool updates, new landscaping, new beach lounge chairs, inviting waterfalls and a renaming. Those four existing water attractions were kept during the Aqautica San Antonio re-theming. The new park opened on Memorial Day weekend May 2012.[12][13]Separate ticket gates for SeaWorld and Aquatica were added at the beginning of 2016. Before they were added, Aquatica's entrance was located inside of SeaWorld, thus obligating Aquatica guests to pay for SeaWorld admission in order to enter the water park unlike the other Aquatica parks in Orlando, FL and Chula Vista, CA which are separate from SeaWorld. The separate gates now give guests the opportunity to visit each park individually just as their other California and Florida counterparts do.An event that features special shows and presentations by locally and nationally known conservationists including Jack Hanna accompanied by many animals, some endangered. The 2017 event will occur every weekend in March and all of Spring Break. The lineup is SeaWorld Live, Flying High, Jungle Jack Hanna, and finally the new Texas Untamed. The event includes activities for children such as a scavenger hunt passport which is used to get stamps at stations around the park. The Sesame Street show "A" is for Africa and Sesame Street Breakfast is also offered at the Bay of Play.An annual fun run event around SeaWorld San Antonio that benefits the SeaWorld & Busch Gardens Conservation Fund. Everyone who registers for the run enjoys free admission to the park for the whole day.A series of children's music concerts featured on select weekends in the springtime. The 2017 lineup will feature music groups such as Secret Agent 23 Skidoo, Recess Monkey, and Choo Choo Soul! The event also features an interactive children's play area with a foam bubble pit, DJ, and chalk art wall. The event is held at Bayside Stadium. Picnic dining opportunities with several music groups are offered for an additional fee at Ports of Call.Guests are invited to set sail on a culinary voyage during the annual Seven Seas Food Festival. Throughout the park, festival goers can sip and savor delicious international foods, unique wines and craft beers and cocktails representing 12 countries near the Mediterranean, North Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean, North Pacific, Pacific Ocean and South Atlantic. The Seven Seas Food Festival offers bold flavors for every taste on Saturdays and Sundays. The festival is open from 11:00 a.m. to park close on all event days.A weekend featuring a world-famous magician. The event will take place at Nautilus Amphitheater.Summer Nights is a summer event at SeaWorld San Antonio that offers extended park hours, a splash zone, giveaways, nightly shows, and fireworks. Shows include Hydro Power 2.0, Shamu's Celebration: Light Up The Night, Sol Celebration and nightly showings of two day shows, "Sea Lion High" and "Ocean Discovery: Dolphins & Beluga Whales."SeaWorld's Halloween Spooktacular is an annual children's Halloween event that takes place at all three SeaWorld parks on October weekends. Activities and attractions include trick-or-treating, photo opportunities, a hay maze, and a kiddie train called SeaWorld Express. The event ends at 6 pm as the park prepares for Howl-O-Scream which begins at 7 pm.Howl-O-Scream is an annual Halloween horror-themed event that takes place at Busch Gardens Tampa, Busch Gardens Williamsburg, and SeaWorld San Antonio. The main icon for the event at SeaWorld San Antonio would be Jack-O-Lantern, a Pumpkin Head who takes over SeaWorld San Antonio around Halloween Time. The event is primarily aimed for teens and adults as the park advises that the event is not recommended for those under the age of 13. In 2013, SeaWorld San Antonio announced that the event would be 'evolving' and changing, sporting a new theme every year. The following is a timeline of the themes Howl-O-Scream had every year since 2013.The event always ends with a dance, pyrotechnic, and light show called Jack is Back which is held at the park's main arches. The show's theme, choreography, and music is changed every several years to suit the music and material that is viral at the time. For example, in Howl-O-Scream's early years the show featured classic rock music and was changed to pop/party anthem music several years after. In 2015, The set was changed to look more sinister and the music and choreography was changed to a mix of pop and dub-step.SeaWorld's Christmas Celebration is an annual Christmas event that takes place at all three SeaWorld parks during Christmastime on select dates. The event offers Christmas themed areas, shows, and attractions. SeaWorld San Antonio broke the record for the largest Christmas light display in Texas by over 5 million lights in 2016 and is planning to increase it by 8 million lights in 2017. A new themed area based on the TV classic Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer called Rudolph's Christmastown was also introduced to the event in 2016. Rudolph's Christmastown offers photo and dining opportunities with Rudolph and Friends, small retrofitted midway games, a sweet stand, the SeaWorld Express train re-themed to the Island of Misfit Toys, and a 27 foot tall Christmas tree light show synchronized to the Rudolph soundtrack.See also: List of museums in Central Texas