Oswald Arnold Gottfried Spengler (29 May 1880 – 8 May 1936) was a German historian and philosopher of history whose interests included mathematics, science, and art. He is best known for his book The Decline of the West (Der Untergang des Abendlandes), published in 1918 and 1922, covering all of world history.Based on the minimum total potential energy principle, also known as the principle of heat death,[1][2] Spengler's model of history postulates that any culture is a superorganism that begins its life cycle as a "low-temperature gas" of loosely interconnected vital-heat-rich rural individuals pulled together by self-gravitation, which condenses their vital heat to ever higher temperatures and thus causes its radiational loss, so that the individuals are forced to use their dwindling vital heat ever more synergetically by undergoing a series of phase transitions towards a civilization, which is a "high-temperature crystal" of densely interconnected vital-heat-deficient urban individuals.[3]He predicted that about the year 2000, Western civilization would enter the period of pre‑death emergency whose countering would necessitate Caesarism (extraconstitutional omnipotence of the executive branch of the central government).Oswald Spengler was born in 1880 in Blankenburg (the Duchy of Brunswick, the German Reich) as the second child of Bernhard (1844–1901) and Pauline (1840–1910) Spengler.[4] Oswald's elder brother was born prematurely (eight months) in 1879, when his mother tried to move a heavy laundry basket, and died at the age of three weeks. Oswald was born ten months after his brother's death.[5] His younger sisters were Adele (1881–1917), Gertrud (1882–1957), and Hildegard (1885–1942).Oswald's paternal grandfather, Theodor Spengler (1806–76), was a metallurgical inspector (Hütteninspektor) in Altenbrak.[6] Oswald's father, Bernhard Spengler, held the position of a postal secretary (Postsekretär) and was a hard-working man with a marked dislike of intellectualism, who tried to instil the same values and attitudes in his son.On 26 May 1799, Friedrich Wilhelm Grantzow, a tailor's apprentice in Berlin, married a Jewish woman named Bräunchen Moses (whose parents, Abraham and Reile Moses, were both deceased by that time). Shortly before the wedding, Bräunchen Moses (ca. 1769–1849) was baptized as Johanna Elisabeth Anspachin (the surname was chosen after her birthplace—Anspach).[7] The couple gave birth to eight children (three before and five after the wedding),[8] one of whom was Gustav Adolf Grantzow (1811–83)—a solo dancer and ballet master in Berlin, who in 1837 married Katharina Kirchner (1813–73), a nervously beautiful solo dancer from a Munich Catholic family;[9] the second of their four daughters was Oswald Spengler's mother Pauline Grantzow.[10] Like the Grantzows in general, Pauline was of a Bohemian disposition, and, before marrying Bernhard Spengler, accompanied her dancer sister on tours. She was the least talented member of the Grantzow family. In appearance, she was plump and a bit unseemly. Her temperament, which Oswald inherited, complemented her appearance and frail physique: she was moody, irritable, and morose.[11]When Oswald was ten years of age, his family moved to the university city of Halle. Here he received a classical education at the local Gymnasium (academically oriented secondary school), studying Greek, Latin, mathematics and sciences. Here, too, he developed his propensity for the arts—especially poetry, drama, and music—and came under the influence of the ideas of Goethe and Nietzsche:After his father's death in 1901 Spengler attended several universities (Munich, Berlin, and Halle) as a private scholar, taking courses in a wide range of subjects. His private studies were undirected. In 1903, he failed his doctoral thesis on Heraclitus (titled Der metaphysische Grundgedanke der Heraklitischen Philosophie, The Metaphysical Fundamental Thought in Heraclitean Philosophy, and conducted under the direction of Alois Riehl) because of insufficient references, which effectively ended his chances of an academic career. He eventually received his Ph.D. from Halle on 6 April 1904. In December 1904, he set to write the secondary dissertation (Staatsexamensarbeit) necessary to qualify as a high school teacher. This became The Development of the Organ of Sight in the Higher Realms of the Animal Kingdom[13] (Die Entwicklung des Sehorgans bei den Hauptstufen des Tierreiches). It was approved and he received his teaching certificate. In 1905 Spengler suffered a nervous breakdown.Biographers report his life as a teacher was uneventful. He briefly served as a teacher in Saarbrücken and then in Düsseldorf. From 1908 to 1911 he worked at a grammar school (Realgymnasium) in Hamburg, where he taught science, German history, and mathematics.In 1911, following his mother's death, he moved to Munich, where he would live until his death in 1936. He lived as a cloistered scholar, supported by his modest inheritance. Spengler survived on very limited means and was marked by loneliness. He owned no books, and took jobs as a tutor or wrote for magazines to earn additional income.He began work on the first volume of Decline of the West intending at first to focus on Germany within Europe, but the Agadir Crisis of 1911 affected him deeply, and he widened the scope of his study:The book was completed in 1914, but publishing was delayed by World War I. Due to a congenital heart problem, Spengler was not called up for military service. During the war, however, his inheritance was largely useless because it was invested overseas; thus he lived in genuine poverty for this period.When The Decline of the West was published in the summer of 1918, it was a wild success.[a] The national humiliation of the Treaty of Versailles (1919) and the ensuing economic depression, caused by World War I reparations, seemed to prove Spengler right. The book comforted Germans by rationalizing their downfall as part of larger world-historical processes. It met with wide success outside of Germany as well, and by 1919 had been translated into several other languages. Spengler rejected a subsequent offer to become Professor of Philosophy at the University of Göttingen, saying he needed time to focus on writing.Based on the minimum total potential energy principle, also known as the principle of heat death,[1][2] Spengler's model of history postulates that any culture is a superorganism that begins its life cycle as a "low-temperature gas" of loosely interconnected vital-heat-rich rural individuals pulled together by self-gravitation, which condenses their vital heat to ever higher temperatures and thus causes its radiational loss, so that the individuals are forced to use their dwindling vital heat ever more synergetically by undergoing a series of phase transitions towards a civilization, which is a "high-temperature crystal" of densely interconnected vital-heat-deficient urban individuals.[3]The model of a culture as a self-gravitating cloud of chaotically colliding "human molecules", which radiate away their heat and are forced to use the remaining heat ever more synergetically by condensing, in a vortex-like manner, into a crystal-like civilization, belongs to Lester Frank Ward, the most influential sociologist of the beginning of the 20th century:The true nature of the universal principle of synergy pervading all nature and creating all the different kinds of structure that we observe to exist, must now be made clearer. Primarily and essentially it is a process of equilibration, i.e., the several forces are first brought into a state of partial equilibrium. It begins in collision, conflict, antagonism, and opposition, and then we have the milder phases of antithesis, competition, and interaction, passing next into a modus vivendi, or compromise, and ending in collaboration and cooperation. … The entire drift is toward economy, conservatism, and the prevention of waste.[15]SYNERGY. That there is a universal principle, operating in every department of nature and at every stage in evolution, which is conservative, creative, and constructive, has been evident to me for many years, but it required long meditation and extensive observation to discover its true nature. ... It further seems probable that vortex motion is based on this principle, or is the same principle, and it is through this that some expect the problem of the nature of gravitation to find its solution.[16]In this model, heat/hate is the centrifugal equalizing force, while gravity/love is the centripetal hierarchizing force:Since a self-gravitationally condensing culture radiates away its equalizing vital heat, while its hierarchizing gravity becomes ever more intense due to the inverse-square law, it ages towards ever higher hierarchism, culminating in Caesarism.In Spengler's model, Western (Judeo-Christian) culture comprises the juvenile/equalizing[18] Aryan component[19][20] (vital heat) and the senile/hierarchizing Semitic component (gravity). The concept of Aryan centrifugality and Semitic centripetality belongs to Carl Vogt:Semitic gravity (God the Father) has lent Aryan heat (Matter the Mother) into existence in order to hierarchize her to the orgasm of Caesarism and thus become incarnate as Christ—the king of kings, the cosmic Caesar. The theory was proposed in 1854 by William Thomson and has since then stayed mainstream:And where did the energy come from to create this matter? The answer is that it was borrowed from the gravitational energy of the universe. The universe has an enormous debt of negative gravitational energy, which exactly balances the positive energy of the matter.[24]Sin is a debt, the world of sinners debtors, God the creditor, and the Man Christ Jesus the responsible surety.[25]The onset of the orgasm of Caesarism is preceded by the red colours of Hitlerism, which is the Aryan race's sex flush—a powerful outburst of Aryan heat/hate, during which Aryan heat, condensed to extremely high temperatures by the gravity of the Semitic debt hierarchy, forms a counter‑hierarchy and attempts to holocaust her Semitic creditor and husband. However, since the Aryans represent Western culture's vital heat, which is centrifugal and anti-hierarchical, the resultant Caesarian hierarchy can only be Semitic, not Aryan. From Spengler's point of view, Hitler is Heatler—a false hierarch, an embodiment of anti-hierarchical heat.Arguing by detailed analogies with three other cultures, Spengler predicted that about the year 2000, the strongest Western nation would enter a 200-year period of Caesarism (extraconstitutional omnipotence of the executive branch of the central government) and then create a global empire.After the year 2200, the global empire will pass through a period of "historyless stiffening and enfeeblement" (Geschichtsloses Erstarren und Ohnmacht), whose duration in the other civilizations was 145–200 years.Mussolini and Hitler considered themselves as Nietzschean superhumans miraculously overcoming Spengler's prophecy of the downfall of the West.[26][27] In reality, their attempt to establish Caesarism is an integral part of the above schedule of the West's decline: "XXth-century transition from constitutional to informal sway of individuals. Annihilation wars. Imperialism." The antidemocratic regimes of Mussolini and Hitler were short-lived because in Spengler's schedule, the domination of money (constitutional "democracy") continues until the year 2000.In late 1919, Spengler published Prussianism and Socialism (Preußentum und Sozialismus), an essay based on notes intended for the second volume of The Decline of the West.A 1928 Time review of the second volume of The Decline described the immense influence and controversy Spengler's ideas enjoyed during the 1920s: "When the first volume of The Decline of the West appeared in Germany a few years ago, thousands of copies were sold. Cultivated European discourse quickly became Spengler-saturated. Spenglerism spurted from the pens of countless disciples. It was imperative to read Spengler, to sympathize or revolt. It still remains so."[29]In 1924, following the social-economic upheaval and inflation, Spengler entered politics in an effort to bring Reichswehr general Hans von Seeckt to power as the country's leader. The attempt failed and Spengler proved ineffective in practical politics.In 1931, he published Man and Technics, which warned against the dangers of technology and industrialism to culture. He especially pointed to the tendency of Western technology to spread to hostile "colored races" which would then use the weapons against the West.[30] This book contains the well-known Spengler quote "Optimism is cowardice".In the German presidential election of 1932, Spengler voted for Hitler.[31] The two men met at the Bayreuth Festival on Tuesday, 25 July 1933.[32] The interview had been requested by Spengler and was arranged by Else Knittel, a friend of Winifred Wagner's. In his 1957 book, Ernst Hanfstaengl recounts Hitler's impressions of that hour-and-a-half conversation:Spengler, in his turn, condemned Hitler's version of socialism as "prolet-Aryan" for its anti-elitism.[34] He believed that Hitler's distrust of the military elite would make the latter sheepishly initiativeless and thus would lead to the Third Reich's defeat in the next world war, because Hitler himself was a great Romantic demagogue (a "heroic tenor", i.e. a sheep in a lion's skin) but no strategist. In the first volume of The Hour of Decision (published on 19 August 1933[35]), Spengler expounded the Athenian adage that an army of sheep commanded by a lion will beat an army of lions commanded by a sheep:They forgot, too, one basic fact. The Romanticism of their Volkslieder sang only the heroism of the common soldier, but the inner worth of these armies (at first amateurs in the calling of arms), their spirit, their discipline, and their training, depended upon the quality of the officer‑corps, whose adequacy was due entirely to eighteenth-century traditions. With the Jacobins also a body of soldiers was morally worth precisely as much as its officer, who had trained it by his example. Napoleon confessed at St. Helena that he would not have been beaten had he had for his superb fighting material a corps of officers like the Austrian, a corps in which chivalrous traditions of loyalty, honour, and silent self-discipline still survived. Once the command wavers in its intentions and its attitude—or itself abdicates, as in 1918—the bravest regiment becomes on the spot a cowardly and helpless herd.[36]He pictured Nazism as the German nation's cowardly escape from reality by regressing to a lower mental age:On 31 August 1933, Völkischer Beobachter called Spengler "an enemy of the workers".[39] In the first half of October 1933, the Hitler Youth biweekly Wille und Macht cancelled a previously announced discussion of the book.[40] However, another edition was allowed to appear in 1934,[41] which is the year when the chorus of indignant Nazi voices was joined by one speaking officially for the party. In a widely-circulated pamphlet,[42] Johann von Leers, Leader of the Division of Foreign Policy and Foreign Information in the German High School for Politics, argued that The Hour of Decision was a counterrevolutionary tract, while its author was merely a negative sceptic, an enemy of the workers, with an "ice-cold contempt for the people", whose real desire was to return to the "old aristocratic society" of the eighteenth century. And his chief racial doctrine of the "coloured" menace was undermining Germany's relations with her natural ally—Japan.[43] At that point, Spengler began to destroy confidential letters and notes. Nevertheless, 200,000 copies of The Hour of Decision had been sold in Germany as of 1934.[44] In 1934, the printing of Spengler's books, including Der Untergang des Abendlandes, was banned, and they suddenly disappeared from the German market.Despite Spengler's polemic with Alfred Rosenberg and remarks about the Führer, on 13 October 1933 he became one of the 100 senators of the German Academy.[45][46] After the Hitlerian ban of 1934, Spengler devoted the few remaining years of his life to a study of the second millennium B.C., of which he completed a few chapters. He spent his final years in Munich, listening to Beethoven, reading Molière and Shakespeare, buying several thousand books, and collecting ancient Turkish, Persian and Indian weapons. He made occasional trips to the Harz mountains, and to Italy. In the spring of 1936, he prophetically remarked in a letter to Reichsleiter Hans Frank that "in ten years, the German Reich will probably no longer exist" ("da ja wohl in zehn Jahren ein Deutsches Reich nicht mehr existieren wird!").[47] He died of a heart attack on 8 May 1936, in Munich, three weeks before his 56th birthday and exactly nine years before the fall of the Third Reich.