 WikiProject History.......Welcome to the History WikiProject on the English Wikipedia! We are a group dedicated to improving Wikipedia's coverage of topics related to history. If you would like to join us, please feel free to add your name to the list of project members WikiProject History GoalsThe goals of this wikiproject are:The entire subject and Wikipedia's coverage of it is intended to be summarized in the Outline of history and its branch outlines. These are in turn is part of Wikipedia's outline system which is one of Wikipedia's main contents systems.Please look it over and fill-in missing topics. If Wikipedia has an article or article section about those topics, please add links to them.While analyzing the outline, please answer the following questions (and fix the outline as needed):The overall purpose of the outline is to help readers comprehend the subject by showing what belongs to it, and within the subject what belongs to what.The outline is a taxonomy of the subject, and also serves as a table of contents and navigation aid to browse Wikipedia's articles (and article sections) about the subject.It is also a useful tool for the WikiProject to analyze, plan, develop, and revise history-related material. It is a hub from which to organize historical topics.It was built as a "reverse outline", a structural model of an existing work, which in addition to being a summary of the work, can reveal the gaps and other weaknesses for revision purposes.Please help improve it.It's our bird's eye view.Thank you. WikiProject History StructureWikiProject History has developed several structural features to help manage our work WikiProject History ScopeMost articles within Category:History and its sub-categories are within our scope. There are already several other history projects with more specific scopes so the majority of our work is on articles that do not seem to fall into other projects' scopes. For further clarification:As of 8 June 2017, there are 7004282740000000000♠28,274 articles within the scope of WikiProject history, of which 7002225000000000000♠225 are featured. This makes up 0.52% of the articles on Wikipedia and 2.77% of featured articles and lists. Including non-article pages, such as talk pages, redirects, categories, etcetera, there are 7004847420000000000♠84,742 pages in the project.The list of history topics lists of basic history topics are some articles that are in this projects scope. The latter list is not intended to be a comprehensive treatment of the subject, but rather an overview. The Lists of topics are intended to be comprehensive and to include links to every article related to the subject on Wikipedia. See List of mathematics topics and List of psychology topics as examples.A number of lists and meta-lists are maintained in Wikipedia: WikiProject History BasicsThe list of basic history topics is intended to provide an overview of the coverage of history on Wikipedia. It is rapidly becoming one of the best history browsing tools on Wikipedia. The List of history topics page provides a history link for every subject for which there is a list on that page, still has some redlinks. Some of those redlinks can be edited to point to existing article sections (in the main article for the corresponding subject), while the rest need articles or sections created so that they can be pointed to them.History of Lacock Requires a rating and possible expansion/cleanupThese articles need to gain featured status as soon as possible:Feel free to add any articles needing improvement you come across here:TasksArticles that Need Improvement Project coordinatorsThe project coordinators are generally responsible for maintaining all of the procedural and administrative aspects of the project, and serve as the designated points-of-contact for procedural issues. They are not, however, endowed with any special executive powers.CoordinatorsFor purposes of helping coordinate project activities, the users listed below have indicated a willingness to perform such functions.Please feel free to contact them directly if you have questions regarding this project which either haven't been responded to here or regarding any other matters you believe are relevant to this project.The primary responsibility of the project coordinators are the maintenance and housekeeping work involved in keeping the project and its internal processes running smoothly; this includes a variety of tasks, such as keeping the announcement and open task lists updated, overseeing the assessment and review processes, managing the proposal and creation of task forces, and so forth. There is fairly little involved that couldn't theoretically be done by any other editor, of course, in only a few places have the coordinators been explicitly written into a process, but since experience suggests that people tend to assume that someone else is doing whatever needs to be done, it has proven beneficial to formally delegate responsibility for this administrative work to a specified group.The coordinators also have several additional roles. They serve as the project's designated points of contact, and are explicitly listed as people to whom questions can be directed in a variety of places around the project. In addition, they have (highly informal) roles in leading the drafting of project guidelines, overseeing the implementation of project decisions on issues like category schemes and template use, and helping to resolve disputes and keep discussions from becoming heated and unproductive.Assessment · Collaboration · Review · Outreach · Task forcesThe Assessment department finds historical articles for the first time and rate them on quality and importance scales.The Collaboration department serves to improve articles that have been assessed by the assessment department by assigning large groups of editors to improve those articles. Help can be requested for an article you are working on or you have found abandoned. A list of open tasks can also be found hereThe Review department carries out peer reviews on historical articles and nominates articles for good and featured status. It also carries out A-Class reviews on articles within our scope.The Outreach department acts as a central location for various member outreach work, including project newsletters, recruitment and welcoming banners, and other related initiatives.Task forces are used to focus attention on specific areas with a project's scope. WikiProject History has no task forces yet. Some may be introduced to work on specific areas if needed. WikiProject History ParticipantsThe Outreach Department acts as a central location for various member outreach work, including project newsletters, recruitment and welcoming banners, and other related initiatives.To join this project simply add your name here.WikiProject History maintains a number of userboxes:To encourage an editor to join this wikiproject, add our invitation to their talk page.If you see a new member, it is a good idea to place our welcome message on their talk page:The newsletter hasn't really been organized yet. A concept issue is available. If you would like to be a member of the project, sign your name below, after the last signee, with "# ~~~~" (four tildes). Members can also feel free to add {{User WikiProject History}} to their user pages.Please add your name to the active list if you return.The banner {{WikiProject History}} should be added to the talk pages of all relevant articles.The Infobox {{Infobox historical event}} should be added to the pages of notable events.A History of region navigational box should be added to History of a 'x' country pages.The following articles have been selected for inclusion in one or more release versions of Wikipedia. Please help ensure that these articles remain of the highest possible quality.The following articles have all been featured in the Main page Did You Know section: WikiProject History CategoriesEvery article on a historical topic should be assigned to as specific a sub-category under the Category:History as possible, as well as to any non-history categories to which it belongs. Since Wikipedia has tens of thousands of articles on historical subjects, they shouldn't all be placed directly in Category:History; there is an elaborate hierarchy of historical categories, described here, and only the lowest-level category need be assigned.Category:History contains only the most general articles, such as History and History of the world. Other historical articles appear in one or more sub-categoriesSee also: Wikipedia:Auto-categorizationThe category for the history of the modern nation X should be called "History of X" or "History of the X" and included.The history of subject Y should be categorized under "History of Y". But the alternate name "Xish history" is acceptable. When a country no longer exists, there's no need to have a separate "History of" category for it. For example, since we have Category:Ancient Rome, there's no need for a category "History of Ancient Rome".When "History of X" becomes large (more than fifty articles, say), create sub-categories and move articles to them. Standard sub-categories include:Don't create sub-categories until you have enough articles to populate them. As a rough guide, it's not worth creating a sub-category unless you have five articles to put in it."Y history of X" should be a sub-category of both "History of X" and of "History of Y". For example, Category:Military history of the United Kingdom is a sub-category of both Category:Military history and of Category:History of the United Kingdom.Few nations have neat histories: most have changed name, constitution and boundaries over their history. This section gives advice on creating sub-categories to reflect these changes.Using the United Kingdom as an example:Here's an incomplete diagram showing these historical categories and how they relate in the category system:(This diagram is far from complete: there is a Category:British Empire, not shown. Category:History of the United Kingdom is in Category:United Kingdom and so on. And there are many sub-categories. But it illustrates the principles.)Having added an article to, say, Category:Military history of the United Kingdom, there's no need to also add that article to Category:Military history, Category:History of the United Kingdom, Category:United Kingdom or Category:History. The category hierarchy expresses the fact that every article about the military history of the UK is an article about military history and an article about the UK. Related Child Projects This project is parent to some other similar projectsExternal sister projects History on Wikiquote  History on Commons  History on Wikisource  History on Wikibooks Further information and articlesSourcebergSee Wikisource for original text (or primary sources). Wikisource (i.e., "Sourceberg") is a repository of source texts in any language which are either in the public domain, or are released under the GFDL.See also : Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not, Wikipedia:Verifiability, Wikipedia:Public domain resources