(changes)(edit)(edit)This list is generated automatically every night around 3 AM (UTC) The aim of this project is to standardize and improve articles related to History of China, as well as to create missing articles. Add this code to your user page: [[Category:WikiProject Chinese history participants|username]]Place this WikiProject notice {{WikiProject China|history=yes}} at the top of an article's Talk page to direct editors to the Wikiproject History of China for guidelines. It will produce:(Note that in this example the notice has been classified as "NA", so that it will not appear on the list of unassessed articles. This will not happen normally if the above code is used.)The goal of Wikipedia is to become a complete, accurate encyclopedia. Verifiability is an important tool to achieve accuracy, so it is strongly recommended to check facts. However, don't be too keen to remove unverified information at the cost of completeness.Primary sources:These are sources which, usually, are recorded by someone who participated in, witnessed, or lived through the event. These are also usually authoritative and fundamental documents concerning the subject under consideration. This includes published original accounts, published original works, or published original research. Physical objects can be primary sources.Wikipedia would not ordinarily be considered a primary source (see Wikipedia:No original research). Over time, however, this situation may change as researchers may use, for example, analyses of Wikipedia edits and reversions as evidence of shifts and changes in attitudes and approaches.Secondary sources:These are sources which, usually, are accounts, works, or research that analyze, assimilate, evaluate, interpret, and/or synthesize primary sources. These are not as authoritative and are supplemental documents concerning the subject under consideration. This includes published accounts, published works, or published research.Wikipedia would be considered a secondary source on some occasions.Tertiary sources:These are sources which, on average, do not fall into the above two levels. They consist of generalized research of a specific subject under consideration. Tertiary sources are analyzed, assimilated, evaluated, interpreted, and/or synthesized from secondary sources, also. These are not authoritative and are just supplemental documents concerning the subject under consideration.Wikipedia would be considered a tertiary source on some occasions.The letters after an item describes generally the type it is (though this can vary pending the exact source). P is for Primary sources, S is for Secondary sources, and T is for Tertiary sources.See Wikisource for original text (or primary sources). Wikisource (i.e., "Sourceberg") is a repository of source texts in any language which are either in the public domain, or are released under the GFDL.See also : Wikipedia:Informative, Wikipedia:Verifiability, Wikipedia:Public domain resources, Wikipedia:Don't include copies of primary sourcesMain article: Wikipedia:Manual of Style (general style issues)In historical articles, the past tense is strongly preferred. While history can be written in the present tense, the general audience of Wikipedia will usually expect the past tense on historical subjects and events that occurred in the past. The present tense in English is only correctly used to describe past events in a work of fiction. This is referred to as the "historical past tense".Remain objective as possible. The point and ideal of Wikipedia is to create an encyclopedic neutral body of knowledge. Avoid using the first-person point of view (emphasising the facts; not the editor). Explain the evidence (from the links and references) and explain the reasons of any conclusions.See: Wikipedia:Naming conventions (Chinese), Wikipedia:Naming conventions (use English)Convention: Use the form most familiar to English speakers. Name pages in English and place the native transliteration on the first line of the article unless the native form is more commonly used in English than the anglicized form.A number of infoboxes can be used for History related articles. These include {{Infobox revolution biography}} and {{Infobox Military Person}}.See: Wikipedia:Manual of Style (biographies)For naming articles See: Wikipedia:Naming conventions (names and titles), for use in article content See Wikipedia:Manual of Style (biographies)See: Wikipedia:Manual of Style (dates and numbers)The Gregorian calendar is the calendar currently used in the Western world. If dates used are from the Julian calendar, please make a note as to any differences.See: Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style#Link_titlesThe following is a suggested formatted reference link for external links and references.Appearance:Source:See also: Wikipedia:Cite your sources, Style guides (for more detailed and formal styles), Wikipedia:External links, Wikipedia:Links