WikiProject Years is a project dedicated to improving all year-related articles on Wikipedia to Featured status. We cover all year, decade, century, and millennia articles and their subarticles. Our scope is incredibly large, so we rely a lot on automated bots to do more tedious tasks. Our current focus is on improving the 1340s article (see User:AndonicO/Tzatziki Squad/1340s), as well as hammering out some new policies and guidelines:In 2009, WikiProject Years developed a guideline for the inclusion of events in year articles, especially more recent years.Important policy discussions took place in January 2009 at Wikipedia talk:Manual of Style (dates and numbers) and at Wikipedia talk:WikiProject Years.This WikiProject's first aim was primarily to formalize the unofficial standard used for creating year pages. A standard was created and then transferred to Wikipedia:Timeline standards. The project still conceivably has responsibility for maintaining/improving that standard. The project currently oversees all year articles, (e.g. 1345, 2008), decade articles, century articles, and millennia articles, as well as their sub-articles (e.g. 2008 in sports).The parent of this WikiProject is the WikiProject Time.(Also, since year articles cover science, philosophy, arts, literature, and other subjects, this project has connections to several other projects not listed.)Edit or discuss these tasks.Shortcuts: Recent changes | Categories | HistoryThe collaboration of the week is 1929Pages can still be rescued even when the project becomes inactiveThe WP:YEARS department that assesses articles for quality and importance can be found at Wikipedia:WikiProject Years/Assessment. If you are interested in assessment and review, please add your name to the list of reviewers on the assessment page.Editors who have not edited on Wikipedia for over six monthsEach century has a different year in topic box, depending on how much information is available in Wikipedia. The following have been created so far:The last one is for the whole 1st millennium (1-1000 AD). However it has not yet been decided how many there should be. See talk page and survey for discussions.Warning: The following example is a bare bones idea of how a year page should look. If you believe something is missing want to add it to "2004", please don't edit this page but go to 2004.Each year should have an infobox at the top right. The templates will be the template {{Year box}} followed by the template {{C21YearInTopic}} (or applicable centuries template, see above).The first sentence in the introduction explains that the page is for a year and not a number. This statement should only be included if the number is on the List of numbers page. The second introduction sentence will describe the year (a link to a calendar) and the type of calendar the year belongs to. The following sentence lists any official designation the year has. For articles containing year summaries, the intro summarizes the year as a whole in a manner consistent with WP:LEAD.The events section is divided into months, each month has a calendar at the beginning and lists any important events that occurred. The month header once linked to the particular month in the year (e.g. January 2004), but no longer does. Each item links to the day.A summary of the year may follow the timeline, describing events of the year. Be sure to cite everything in this section.The Births section lists notable births in that year, divided into month sections. Each entry links to the day page, has a very short description of the person, and links to the death year if known.The deaths section begins with a see also statement, and follows the same format as the births section: Month section, day link, name, and birth year link if known.It has not yet been decided what else will be included on the year pages. Many currently have sections for awards, fiction, external links etc. These sections may be removed (or more likely moved to a separate page to be included on the infobox) later, but for now the following form can be followed to close out the page.