Thomas Brattle •The Biography WikiProject concerns the creation, development, and organization of Wikipedia's articles about persons (including but not limited to biographies). It includes only articles about individual persons, not about an organization or group or association, unless a substantial section of the article is a biography of a person related to that organization or group. It includes biographies of only real humans; thus, the project does not cover other animals or fictitious persons (such as pseudonyms) or fictional characters. As of 8 June 2017, there are 7006144849300000000♠1,448,493 articles and 7003387300000000000♠3,873 lists within the scope of WikiProject Biography, of which 7003143800000000000♠1,438 are featured and 7003487700000000000♠4,877 are good articles. As of 1 January 2017 according to WHGI and based on wikidata, only 240,445 of Wikipedia's 1,432,907 biographies are about women, amounting to 16.78%.Check out the newsletter archives!Are you starting from scratch and want some guidance on creating a biographical article? Follow these helpful tips! Some of them are also useful for work on articles that have already been started.No classification of biographies has been defined. See this example on dividing a topic into a hierarchy.{{WikiProject Biography}} TalkThe project notice designed to be placed in the talk page of any article that has been or should be edited as part of this Wikiproject. Please see the assessment page for parameters to use in rating articles.{{Portal|Biography}} TalkShows a standardized link to the Biography portal, and may be suitable for the "See also" sections of biographies.{{User WPBiography}} TalkThis can be placed on your user page to show that you are a part of this Wikiproject.Miscellaneous templatesStubsPeople stubsNavigate to this category to browse for the appropriate stubInfoboxesCategory:People and person infobox templates • List of InfoboxesNavigate to this category to browse for the appropriate infoboxGenerally see Wikipedia:WikiProject Biography/MembersBelow are project members who are also Wikipedia admins (in A-Z order)The assessment department focuses on assessing the quality of Wikipedia's biography articles. While much of the work is done in conjunction with the WP:1.0 program, the article ratings are also used within the project itself to aid in recognizing excellent contributions and identifying topics in need of further work.The ratings are done in a distributed fashion through parameters in the {{WPBiography}} project banner; this causes the articles to be placed in a set of categories that serves as the basis for an automatically generated worklist.The core biographies department seeks to bring 200 of our most important and visited articles to featured article standard (see also: v1.0 Biographies).The peer review department conducts peer reviews of articles on request; this helps to obtain ideas for further improvement by having contributors who may not have previously worked on particular articles examine them. Project members are invited to submit articles to the department in lieu of using the generic peer review process.5 random unreferenced BLPs, updated daily: Sean T. Drinkwater | Nicolás Nynkeu | Aoi Enomoto | Cem Tuncer | Vladimir Nikolaevich PlatonovA-class review: A-class review examined articles to ensure they met the A-class standards. Currently, there is a freeze on promotions to A-class.Collaboration: The collaboration department sought to identify particular articles that would benefit from a significant collaborative effort. A single article was selected as the focus, and the project attempted to improve it, potentially to featured article standard.Outreach: The outreach department acted as the project's central point of coordination for recruitment of new members and production of newsletters.Work groups are informal groups of editors gathered for collaborative work on a particular topic within the field of biography; all project members are encouraged to participate in any that interest them. Also included below are other WikiProjects that fall within our scope.Comprehensive lists of Women who require Wikipedia biographies are available from the Women in Red wikiproject .Cleanup listing for this project is available. See also the tool's wiki page and the index of WikiProjects.