A few Wikipedians have come together to make some suggestions about how we might organize data in articles about saints. These are only suggestions, things to give you focus and to get you going, and you shouldn't feel obligated in the least to follow them. But if you don't know what to write or where to begin, following the below guidelines may be helpful. Mainly, we just want you to write articles! This WikiProject aims primarily at standardizing the articles about people venerated by some Christians as saints or the blessed and making sure that they maintain a NPOV.In the Roman Catholic Church the term "saint" refers to both the holy men, women and angels on earth and in heaven—however, since the 10th century, the title "Saint" is only given to persons who have been officially recognized (canonized) by the Church. Those given the title informally, prior to the establishment of the canonization process, are generally still considered both "saints" and "Saints."The Eastern Orthodox Churches, Assyrian Church of the East, Oriental Orthodox Churches, Anglican Communion and Lutheran Churches maintain liturgical calendars commemorating individuals they consider to have lived according to the will of God, although not all of them use the word "saint" so often or explicitly. The African Orthodox Church, Old Catholic Churches, Independent Catholic Churches, Continuing Anglican Churches, and other Catholic churches not in communion with Rome also have lists of saints. "Canonization" in all of these groups is far less legalistic than is the Roman Catholic. Also, in these churches, lack of "official recognition" in no way, shape, or form, prevents someone from being a full-fledged Saint. This project will include within its scope those individuals formally recognized as saints or included in the liturgical calendars of one or more Christian denominations.The steps to canonization that the candidates have to go through to become a saint:Saints who are also venerated by the Eastern Orthodox Church are in Category:Christian saints by century and/or Category:Christian saints by nationality.Non-Christian Saints: If there is an interest in including saints from religions other than Christianity, please propose those changes on our talk page and we can integrate them into the wikiproject.SubpagesWikiProject Saints maintains a number of subpages in order to organize the work that is done here. Please feel free to pick out a page and help out.Cleanup listing for this project is available. See also the tool's wiki page and the index of WikiProjects.File:Hans Holbein, the Younger - Sir Thomas More - Google Art Project.jpgFile:Harriet Tubman late in life3.jpgFile:Joan of Arc-Notre Dame.jpgFile:Joan of Arc-Notre Dame.jpg (2006-07-14)File:Harriet Tubman late in life3.jpg (2009-02-18)File:Hans Holbein, the Younger - Sir Thomas More - Google Art Project.jpg (2013-07-06)The following articles within the scope of this project have been selected by the Version 1.0 Editorial Team for inclusion in one or more release versions.If you would like to be a member of the project, sign your name below with "# ~~~~" (four tildes). For a list of participants' specific interests -- or to add your own interests -- see our members pageThe parents of this WikiProject are WikiProject Biography and WikiProject Christianity.Saints: Saint Michael - Saint Gabriel - Mary - John the Baptist - Saint Stephen - Saint Peter - Saint Paul - saint anthonyTraditions: Calendar of saints - Hagiography - List of saints - Symbology of the SaintsTheology: Communion of Saints - Intercession of saints - Martyrs - Patron saintRoman Catholicism: Congregation for the Causes of Saints - Servant of God - Venerable - Beatification - Canonization