Vladimir Yakovlevich Propp (Russian: Владимир Яковлевич Пропп; 29 April [O.S. 17 April] 1895 – 22 August 1970) was a Soviet folklorist and scholar who analyzed the basic plot components of Russian folk tales to identify their simplest irreducible narrative elements.Vladimir Propp was born on 17 April 1895 in Saint Petersburg to a German family. He attended Saint Petersburg University (1913–1918), majoring in Russian and German philology.[1] Upon graduation he taught Russian and German at a secondary school and then became a college teacher of German.His Morphology of the Folktale was published in Russian in 1928. Although it represented a breakthrough in both folkloristics and morphology and influenced Claude Lévi-Strauss and Roland Barthes, it was generally unnoticed in the West until it was translated in 1958. His character types are used in media education and can be applied to almost any story, be it in literature, theatre, film, television series, games, etc.In 1932, Propp became a member of Leningrad University (formerly St. Petersburg University) faculty. After 1938, he chaired the Department of Folklore until it became part of the Department of Russian Literature. Propp remained a faculty member until his death in 1970.[1]His main books are:He also published some articles, the most important are:First printed in specialized reviews, they were republished in Folklore and Reality, Leningrad 1976Two books were published post mortem:The first book remained unfinished, the second one is the edition of the course he gave in Leningrad university.Propp broke up fairy tales into sections. Through these sections he was able to define the tale into a series of sequences that occurred within the Russian fairytale. Usually there is an initial situation, after which the tale usually takes the following 31 functions. Propp used this method to decipher Russian folklore and fairy tales. First of all, there seems to be at least two distinct types of structural analysis in folklore. One is the "syntagmatic" manner of assessment (as termed following Lévi-Strauss 1964: 312), covering Propp's Morphology among others in which the structure of a piece folklore is described in the chronological order of the linear events it comprises. If a tale consists of elements A to Z, the structure of the tale is thus delineated in the same sequence. The other type of analysis is termed "paradigmatic" (cf. Sebag 1963:75), and describes instead the underlying pattern (usually based upon a priori binary principle of opposition) of the folkloric text, independent of chronology. Elements of the plot may be taken out of their "given" order and regrouped in various analytic schemes.Respectively equivalent to syntagmatic and paradigmatic are the terms "diachronic" and "synchronic". Diachronic covers the sort of analysis that conveys a sense of traversing the highs and lows of a story, like riding the pattern of a sine wave.[2] The second term, synchronic, is where the story is instead absorbed as a whole, like the pattern of a circle. Most literary analyses are synchronic, offering a greater sense of unity among the components of a story. Although both structural analyses convey partial information about the story, each angle of analysis delivers a different set of information.[3]After the initial situation is depicted, the tale takes the following sequence of 31 functions:[4]Some of these functions may be inverted, such as the hero receives an artifact of power whilst still at home, thus fulfilling the donor function early. Typically such functions are negated twice, so that it must be repeated three times in Western cultures.[5]He also concluded that all the characters could be resolved into 7 broad character functions in the 100 tales he analyzed:These roles could sometimes be distributed among various characters, as the hero kills the villain dragon, and the dragon's sisters take on the villainous role of chasing him. Conversely, one character could engage in acts as more than one role, as a father could send his son on the quest and give him a sword, acting as both dispatcher and donor.[7]Propp's approach has been criticized for removing all verbal considerations from the analysis, even though the folktale's form is almost always oral, and also all considerations of tone, mood, character, and anything that differentiates one fairy tale from another. One of the most prominent critics of Propp is the French structuralist Claude Lévi-Strauss, who used Propp's monograph on the morphology of the folktale to demonstrate the superiority of the structuralist approach, and the shortcomings of the formalist approach.[8] Propp responded to this criticism in a sharply-worded rebuttal: he wrote that Lévi-Strauss showed no interest in empirical investigation.[9]